Updated doc to describe connectivity requirements (#1142)
liqotech/liqo: docs/pages/installation/connect-requirements.md

This implies also that any network device (**NAT**, **firewall**, etc) sitting in the path between the two clusters must be configured to enable direct connectivity toward the above services, as presented in the [Network firewalls](#network-firewalls) section.

The tuple <IP/port> exported by the Liqo services (i.e., `liqo-auth`, `liqo-gateway`) depends on the Liqo configuration, chosen at Liqo installation time, which may depend on the physical setup of your cluster and the characteristics of your service.

**Auth Service**: when you install Liqo, you can choose to expose this service through a LoadBalancer service, a NodePort service, or an Ingress controller (the latter requires the service to be exposed as ClusterIP).
This choice depends (1) on your necessities, (2) on the cluster configuration (e.g., the NodePort cannot be used if your nodes have private IP addresses, hence cannot be reached from the Internet), and (3) whether the above primitives (e.g., the Ingress controller) are available in your cluster.

> For instance, if you play with a "toy" cluster such as one created with KIND, you may not have neither a LoadBalancer service, nor an ingress controller, hence you may be forced to use a NodePort service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For instance, if you play with a "toy" cluster such as one created with KIND, you may have neither a LoadBalancer service, nor an ingress controller, hence you may be forced to use a NodePort service.
```

**Network Gateway**: the same applies also for the Network Gateway, except that it cannot be exported through an Ingress. In fact, while the Auth service uses a standard HTTP/REST interface, the Network gateway is the termination of a network tunnel; hence only LoadBalancer and NodePort services are supported.

> We sugges to install Liqo through the [liqoctl install](installation/install) command; this tool analyzes the characteristics of your cluster and makes the best choices for you.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We suggest to install Liqo through the [liqoctl install](/installation/install) command; this tool analyzes the characteristics of your cluster and makes reasonable choices for you.
```

> However, more advanced configuration can be achieved by setting the proper parameters in the [Liqo Helm Chart](/installation/chart_values) before launching the Liqo installation, as detailed in the [advanced installation option page](installation/install-advanced).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, more advanced configuration can be achieved by setting the proper parameters in the [Liqo Helm Chart](/installation/chart_values) before launching the Liqo installation, as detailed in the [advanced installation option page](/installation/install-advanced).
```

Finally, in some cases clusters may reside behind a NAT, which may also introduce additional limitations and it may require the configuration of some port-forwarding rules.

#### Additional considerations

The choice of the way you expose Liqo services to remote cluster may not be trivial in some cases.
Here we list some additional notes you should consider in your choice:

* **NodePort service**: although a NodePort service can be used to expose the Auth service and the Network gateway, often the IP addresses of the nodes are configured with private IP addresses, hence not being suitable for connections originated from the Internet. This happens rather often in production clusters, and on public clusters as well.
* **Ingress controller**: in case the Auth service is exposed through an Ingress, you should remember that, by default, the Auth service uses the TLS protocol. Hence, either you configure your Ingress controller to connect to backend services with TLS as well, or you disable TLS on the Auth Service.

> * **API Server behind NAT**: in case the cluster is behind NAT, the IP address/port of the API server (i.e., `apiServer.address` in `values.yaml`) must be set as the _public_ <IP/port> tuple. This is not required for the Auth service, as the liqoctl command used to connect to the remote cluster 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **API Server behind NAT**: in case the cluster is behind NAT, the IP address/port of the API server (i.e., `apiServer.address` in `values.yaml`) must be set as the _public_ <IP/port> tuple.
```

> * **Auth service behind NAT**: in case your cluster is behind NAT, the `liqoctl` command used by the remote cluster to peer with you must use the _public_ <IP/port> tuple of the Auth service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Auth service behind NAT**: in case your cluster is behind NAT, the `liqoctl add cluster` command used by the remote cluster to peer with you must be adapted to use the _public_ <IP/port> tuple of the Auth service.
```

### Clusters in the same LAN

This represents a very particular scenario supported by Liqo, in which clusters (K3s or K8s) in the same LAN can rely on the mDNS-based discovery mechanism implemented by Liqo to identify all the other clusters present on the same LAN segment.
This enables easy cluster setup (and peering) e.g., in case of rapid prototyping.

![](/images/scenarios/on-prem-to-on-prem.svg)

Although other alternatives are possible, we suggest the easiest configuration in this case, which relies on the following options:

|           | Cluster A (On-LAN)  | Cluster B (On-LAN) |
| --------- | ------------------- | ------------------- |
| **Auth service** |  NodePort | NodePort |
| **Network gateway** | NodePort | NodePort |
| **API server** | Exposed | Exposed |

### Network firewalls
Once Liqo has been installed, you may have to configure existing firewalls to enable remote clusters to contact the three endpoints (`liqo-auth`, `liqo-gateway`, API server) that need to be publicly accessible in the peering phase.

> To know the network parameters (i.e., <IP/port>) used by `liqo-auth` and `liqo-gateway`, you can use standard Kubernetes commands (e.g., `kubectl get services -n liqo-namespace`), while you should know the <IP/port> used by your API server since it is written in your `kubeconfig` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To know the network parameters (i.e., <IP/port>) used by `liqo-auth` and `liqo-gateway`, you can use standard Kubernetes commands (e.g., `kubectl get services -n liqo`), while you should know the <IP/port> used by your API server since it is written in your `kubeconfig` file.
```

* **Network gateway service** (`liqo-gateway`): Liqo service responsible for setting up the network connectivity between clusters. 
* **Kubernetes API server**: standard Kubernetes API Server, that is used by the (remote) Liqo instance to create the resources required to start the peering process.

_Reciprocally accessible_ means that a first cluster must be able to connect to the <IP/port> of the above services exposed on the second cluster, and viceversa (from second cluster to the first); some exception that refer to the Network gateway are detailed in the following of the document.
This implies also that any network device (**NAT**, **firewall**, etc) sitting in the path between the two clusters must be configured to enable direct connectivity toward the above services, as presented in the [Network configuration](#network-configuration) section.

The tuple <IP/port> exported by the Liqo services (i.e., `liqo-auth`, `liqo-gateway`), depends on the Liqo configuration, chosen at Liqo installation time, which may depend on the physical setup of your cluster and the characteristics of your service.

> **Auth Service**: when you install Liqo, you can choose to expose this service through a LoadBalancer, NodePort, or ClusterIP service (the latter requires an additional resource such as an Ingress controller); the choice depends on your necessities and whether the above primitives (e.g., the Ingress controller) are available in your cluster.

Author: I will simplify this, but I would not confuse Ingress with Kubernetes services (I was rather confused because of that in the original sentence).

For instance, if you play with a "toy" cluster such as Kubernetes In A Docker (KIND), you may not have neither a LoadBalancer service, nor an ingress controller, hence you may be forced to use a NodePort service.

> **Network Gateway**: the same applies also for the Network Gateway, except that it cannot be exported as ClusterIP/Ingress. In fact, while the Auth service uses a standard HTTP/REST interface and therefore can be exposed also through an Ingress Controller, the Network gateway is the termination of a network tunnel, hence only LoadBalancer and NodePort are supported.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Network Gateway**: the same applies also for the Network Gateway, except that it cannot be exported through an Ingress. In fact, while the Auth service uses a standard HTTP/REST interface, the Network gateway is the termination of a network tunnel; hence only LoadBalancer and NodePort services are supported.
```

> The choice about how to expose the above services can be done by setting the proper parameters in the [Liqo Helm Chart](/installation/chart_values) before launching the Liqo install, as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The choice about how to expose the above services can be done by setting the proper parameters in the [Liqo Helm Chart](/installation/chart_values) before launching the Liqo installation, as follows:
```

* **Authentication service** (`liqo-auth`): Configured in the ``auth`` section of the [Liqo chart values](/installation/chart_values).
* **Network gateway service** (`liqo-gateway`): Configured in the ``gateway`` section of the [Liqo chart values](/installation/chart_values).
* **Kubernetes API server**: Configured in the ``apiServer`` section of the [Liqo chart values](/installation/chart_values).

> Although in some cases Liqo can derive the IP/port used by your API server (i.e., it selects the first node labeled as _control node_ and port 6443), it is always better to specify the above coordinates explicitly in the Liqo configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although in most cases *liqoctl* can derive the IP/port used by your API server, it is possible to manually override the above coordinates in the Liqo configuration.
```

Remember also that this is not a Liqo service, but the control plane of your Kubernetes cluster. Hence, this value cannot be used to _update_ the endpoint of the API server, but simply to tell Liqo which is the <IP/port> used by that endpoint.

> The above values can also be updated after installation by changing the values in your `values.yml`, then issuing an ``helm update``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The above values can also be updated after installation by changing the values in your `values.yml`, then issuing an ``helm update`` command.
```

> More  information about Helm and how charts can be configured are available in the [Helm official documentation](https://helm.sh/docs/). 

Reviewer: Could probably drop this sentence.

> More  information about Helm and how charts can be configured are available in the [Helm official documentation](https://helm.sh/docs/). 

Author: ```suggestion
```

3) Once done, Cluster A connects to the Network Gateway of cluster B to establish a direct tunnel (i.e., VPN-like) for all the traffic between the two clusters.

Although in some cases the step (3) may be completed successfully even if a single Network Gateway is publicly reachable (Liqo will try to establish the connection from A to B; if this fails, it forces the connection starting from B to A), we strongly suggest to publicly expose both Network Gateways in order to avoid problems in more advanced deployment options (e.g., a peering between A and B&C, followed by an automatic direct peering between B-C as a shortcut).

### Possible configurations for Liqo exposed services

We present here some (not all!) common scenarios supported by Liqo as possible examples for your configuration.

#### Public cloud

This scenario refers to a managed cluster (e.g., AKS, EKS, GKE); public services could be exposed using Public IPs/URLs according to the following options:

|           | Managed cluster   |
| --------- | ----------------- |
| **Auth service** |  LoadBalancer/Ingress |
| **Network gateway** | LoadBalancer |
| **API server** | Provided by the Cloud Provider|

> Although in theory also a NodePort could be used for the Auth service and the Network gateway, often the IP addresses of the nodes on public clusters are configured with IP private addresses, hence not being suitable for connections originated from the Internet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although in theory also a NodePort could be used for the Auth service and the Network gateway, often the IP addresses of the nodes on public clusters are configured with private IP addresses, hence not being suitable for connections originated from the Internet.
```

#### On-premise

This scenario refers to an on-premise cluster (K3s or K8s); public services could be exposed using Public IPs/URLs according to the following options:

|           | On-prem cluster     |
| --------- | ------------------- |
| **Auth service** |  LoadBalancer/NodePort/Ingress |
| **Network gateway** | LoadBalancer/NodePort |
| **API server** | Ingress/Public IP |

In this case, NodePort assumes that worker nodes have public IP addresses, or at least that their IP addresses are reachable from the Internet.

In case the Auth service is exposed through an Ingress, you should pay attention to disable TLS on the service or to configure your Ingress Controller to support a TLS backend. 

> This last configuration will ensure an end-to-end TLS connection.

Reviewer: This is only partially true, as the TLS connection is not E2E

3) The IP address/port of the API server (i.e., `apiServer.address` in `values.yaml`) must be set as the _public_ <IP/port> tuple.

It is worth noticing that Liqo supports only scenarios in which _one_ of the cluster is behind NAT; network connectivity cannot be established in case both clusters are behind NAT. This should be solved in future releases.

### Clusters in the same LAN

This represents a very particular scenario supported by Liqo, in which clusters (K3s or K8s) in the same LAN can rely on the mDNS-based discovery mechanism implemented by Liqo to identify all the other clusters present on the same LAN segment.
This enables easy cluster setup (and peering) e.g., in case of rapid prototyping.

![](/images/scenarios/on-prem-to-on-prem.svg)

Although other alternatives are possible, we suggest the easiest configuration in this case, which relies on the following options:

|           | Cluster A (On-LAN)  | Cluster B (On-LAN) |
| --------- | ------------------- | ------------------- |
| **Auth service** |  NodePort | NodePort |
| **Network gateway** | NodePort | NodePort |
| **API server** | Exposed | Exposed |

### Network firewalls

> Once Liqo has been installed, you may have to configure existing firewalls to enable remote clusters to contact the three endpoints (`liqo-auth`, `liqo-gateway`, API server) that needs to be publicly accessible in the peering phase.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once Liqo has been installed, you may have to configure existing firewalls to enable remote clusters to contact the three endpoints (`liqo-auth`, `liqo-gateway`, API server) that need to be publicly accessible in the peering phase.
```
